# _hafoe_ 
_hafoe_ is a command-line-based tool for the automated exploratory analysis of AAV chimeric libraries and identification of enriched variants in desired tissues using long-read sequencing datasets.

### Operating Systems
_hafoe_ works with Unix operating system (tested for Ubuntu Linux).

### Installation
Download and uncompress the _hafoe_ package in a local directory. Then make hafoe.sh file executable by running `chmod +x hafoe.sh`.

### Usage
The common _hafoe_ usage is:

```
./hafoe.sh \
    --explore \
    --identify \
    -parentlib <path_to_parental_sequences_fasta_file> \
    -chimericlib <path_to_chimeric_sequences_csv/fastq_file> \
    -enrichedlib1 <path_to_dir_with_enriched_sequences_fastq_file(s)> \
    -o <output_directory> example/hafoe_out \
    -title_of_the_run <title> 
```

### Required arguments
_hafoe_ works with one of the --explore, --identify options or both

--explore option should be specified for exploratory analysis of chimeric sequences. When using this option, the required arguments are: 
```
-parentlib the full path to the fasta file of parental sequences
-chimericlib the full path to the csv file of chimeric sequences and their abundances or fastq file of chimeric sequences
```

--identify option should be specified for identification of novel tissue-specific variants. When using this option, the required argument is: 
```
-enrichedlib1 the full path to directory containing fastq file(s) of sequences obtained after enrichment in one or more tissue samples
```

When using --identify option without --explore, the required argument is:
```
-exploreout the full path to output directory generated by running _hafoe_ with only --explore option
```

### Additional arguments
Run `./hafoe.sh` to see additional arguments.

### Test run
To test how _hafoe_ works navigate to hafoe/ directory and run `example/run_hafoe.sh`. All required parameters are specified, however, you will need to change -cdhitest, -cdhitest2d, -rlib options to point to corresponding tools in your system.

A successful test run should generate the example/hafoe_out/ output directory with output files and reports.

### Output
_hafoe_'s main outputs are files/, reports/ directories in output directory.

### System requirements
In your system you have to have: 

R (version 4.1 or higher) with the following packages:
dplyr: version 1.0.9
ORFik: version 1.12.13
plotly: version 4.10.0
ggplot2: version 3.3.6
gplots: version 3.1.3
microseq: version 2.1.4
Biostrings: version 2.60.2
stringr: version 1.4.0
cowplot: version 1.1.1
seqinr: version 4.2.8 
 
Bowtie 2 (v2.4.2), 

CD-HIT (v4.8.1), 

Clustal Omega (v1.2.4), 

samtools version >=1.9 
 
